# Thoughts After Day 21

It's definitely time to take a break from AOC 2023. I'm starting to get shoulder and hip pain from sitting down and staring at problems for too long. However, I'm not really sure I'm all that excited to continue with AOC. I may at some point sit down and finish out this year, but at this point I have no desire to continue. Why?

The main reason is that I'm not really learning anything much anymore and the reward/time ratio for days 20 and 21 were getting ridiculously low. Both days revolved around noticing patterns in the input data and then making guesses as to what the answer will look like. I was able to explore/guess the right pattern for day 20, but I had no clue for day 21.

The real problem is that these were _guesses_, there's really no analytical way to know that these guesses were right. There's something very unsatisfactory about guessing and moving along because you happened upon the "right" number.

Take day 20. It turns out the right guess was the there was a pattern, that the pattern would continue indefinitely, which would lead to the lcm of the inputs being the right answer. However, there's no proof that continuing longer than I did wouldn't have lead to a break in the pattern. The only way I know that it didn't was because the answer was correct by assuming it would go on indefinitely.

Day 21 was basically the same problem...except the guess was even more blind and even less obvious that it would continue indefinitely. Again, the only way I know that it held was that the guess lead to the right answer. Day 21 was a double disappointment because I basically had to crib someone else's answer. It makes vague sense, but you get the sense that people happened upon a pattern and it "just worked." I haven't read any good explanations as to why it works. I've seen some attempts at explaining why the pattern continues...but none are very convincing.

The real insight is _why_ the answers worked. But, that is only because of the carefully crafted inputs. To get any insights worth having would require knowing the theory behind how the inputs were constructed, which of course I don't have. For example, the theory behind day 20 would involve knowing how to construct circuits with certain properties, but I didn't learn that from the problem, I just learned how to guess.

AOC has taught me about dynamic programming, path finding, and a few other programming topics. But, I'm not learning anymore. I'm not interested in getting on the leaderboard. AOC has always been for me a way to get better at programming, but it's been a while since I learned anything about programming. I am learning a bit about a few things unrelated to programming, for example learning how to find the area under an irrelgular polygon on day 18. There are other examples from other years. But, I'm not really interested in that. And I'm certainly not interested in spending the amount of time AOC requires to learn about those topics. Again, take day 18 as an example. Learning about how to get the area inside an irregular polygon took about 2 minutes. Solving the problem took far longer. Again, the reward/time ratio stops making sense.

The one nice thing about AOC is that it does teach how to apply algorithmic thinking. But, there seems to be a limit to the types of algorithms that are taught. This is probably because the days have to be solved in a reasonable amount of time, the explanations can't be too long, the author has a limited knowledge base, and AOC is really about getting fast answers, the programming stuff is clearly secondary.

So, now that I'm pretty sure I'm done with AOC, what next? One possibility would be to learn how he constructs the puzzles, then apply that knowledge to crafting my own problems. That would probably give deep insights into algorithms. Before doing that, it would probably be best to simply study certain algorithms and seek out problems involving those algorithms to practice and get insights. Solving puzzles really is a great way to learn and practice the craft of software, but I don't think AOC is worth it for that anymore.
